Aspiration of the Mahāmudrā of Definitive Meaning
by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje

namo guru
Namo guru!
lama nam dang yidam kyilkhor lha
All you masters and yidam deities of the various maṇḍalas,
chok chu dü sum gyalwa sé dangché
Buddhas and your heirs throughout the ten directions and three times:
dak la tser gong dak gi mönlam nam
Turn your loving attention towards me and grant your blessings,
jishyin drubpé tün gyur jinlab dzö
So that all may be conducive to the fulfilment of my aspirations.

dak dang tayé semchen tamché kyi
May streams of virtue, unsullied by the three conceptual spheres,
samjor namdak gangri lé kyepé
Sprung forth from snowy peaks—my own pure intentions and actions,
khor sum nyokmé gé tsok chugyün nam
And those of all other sentient beings, who are infinite in number—
gyalwa ku shyi gyatsor juk gyur chik
All merge into the vast ocean of the buddhas’ four kāyas.

jisi dé matobpa desi du
Meanwhile, for as long as I have not yet reached that level of attainment,
kyé dang kyewa tserab küntu yang
Throughout the course of my many lives in one rebirth after another,
dik dang dukngal dra yang mi drak ching
May I never so much as hear the words ‘wrongdoing’ or ‘suffering’,
dé gé gyatsö pal la chöpar shok
And may I enjoy the splendour of oceanic happiness and virtue.

daljor chok tob dé tsön sherab den
Having found supreme freedom and advantage, with faith, diligence, and wisdom,
shenyen zang ten dampé chü tob né
May I rely upon excellent spiritual friends, receive the elixir of instruction,
tsulshyin drub la barché machipar
And accomplish it in the proper way without any impediment,
tserab küntu damchö chöpar shok
Putting the genuine Dharma into practice throughout all my lives.

lung rik töpé mi shedrib lé drol
Study of scripture and reasoning liberates from the veils of unknowing;
mengak sampé tetsom münnak chom
Contemplating instructions overcomes the dense darkness of doubt;
gom jung ö kyi neluk jishyin sal
And the light arisen from meditation illuminates reality just as it is—
sherab sum gyi nangwa gyepar shok
May the radiance of these three forms of wisdom expand and increase.

takché tadral den nyi shyi yi dön
The ground is the two truths, free from eternalist and nihilistic extremes;
drokur tadral tsok nyi lam chok gi
The supreme path, twofold accumulation, unlimited by projection and denial,
sishyi tadral dön nyi dré tobpé
Brings the fruition, twofold benefit, free from the extremes of existence and quiescence—
gol chuk mepé chö dang trepar shok
May I encounter this Dharma that is without error or confusion.

jang shyi semnyi saltong zungjuk la
Upon the basis of purification, mind’s nature of clarity and emptiness in union,
jongjé chakchen dorjé naljor ché
May that which purifies, the great adamantine yoga of Mahāmudrā,
jangja lobur trulpé drima nam
Purify its objects, the stains of adventitious delusion,
jang dré dridral chöku ngön gyur shok
And, as a result, may I realize the immaculate dharmakāya.

shyi la drondok chöpa tawé deng
Eliminating misconceptions of the ground brings assurance in the view;
dé la ma yeng kyongwa gompé né
To sustain that view without distraction is the key point of meditation;
gom dön kün la tsal jong chöpé chok
And to train in all of meditation’s facets is the supreme form of action—
ta gom chöpé deng dang denpar shok
May I possess the confident assurance of view, meditation and conduct.

chö nam tamché sem kyi namtrul té
All phenomena are but apparitions of the mind;
sem ni semmé sem kyi ngowö tong
Mind itself is without mind, empty of mind’s essence—
tong shying magak chiryang nangwa té
Empty yet unrestricted, appearing in any way at all.
lekpar tak né shyi tsa chöpar shok
Having examined it well, may I eradicate the base.

yö manyongwé rangnang yul du trul
I mistake my own perceptions, which have never been real, for objects,
marik wang gi rangrig dak tu trul
And through ignorance’s power, confuse my own awareness for a self.
nyidzin wang gi sipé long du khyam
Through duality’s force, I roam the arena of saṃsāric existence.
marik trulpé tsé dar chöpar shok
May I thoroughly eradicate ignorance and delusion.

yöpa mayin gyalwé kyang ma zik
It is not existent, for even the buddhas have not seen it.
mepa mayin khordé kün gyi shyi
It is not nonexistent, for it’s the basis of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
galdu mayin zungjuk umé lam
This is not a contradiction; it’s the middle way of unity.
tadral sem kyi chönyi tokpar shok
May I realize mind’s nature, free from limiting extremes.

di yin shyepa gang gi tsönpamé
There is nothing to point to, saying, “It is this.”
di min shyeja gang gi kakpamé
Nor can there be denial as in, “This it is not.”
lo lé depé chönyi dümajé
Dharmatā, beyond the mind, is uncompounded.
yangdak dön gyi ta ni ngepar shok
May I determine the bounds of genuine reality.

di nyi ma tok khorwé gyatsor khor
Not realizing this, I drift about in saṃsāra’s ocean.
di nyi tok na sangye shyen namé
When I do realize it, buddhahood lies nowhere else.
tamché di yin di min gangyang mé
Everything is this; there is nothing else besides.
chönyi künshyi tsang ni rigpar shok
May I know the hidden point of the all-ground, dharmatā.

nang yang sem la tong yang sem yin té
Appearances are mind; emptiness is also the mind.
tok kyang sem la trul yang rang gi sem
Realization is mind; delusion too is one’s own mind.
kyé kyang sem la gak kyang sem yinpé
What’s arisen is mind; what’s ceased is also mind.
drondok tamché sem la chöpar shok
May I eliminate all misconceptions within the mind.

löjé tsolwé gom gyi ma lé ching
Unspoilt by deliberate, mind-fabricated meditation,
tamal dudzi lung gi makyöpar
And unswayed by the winds of ordinary preoccupation,
machö nyukma rangbab jok shepé
May I learn how to settle naturally without contrivance,
sem dön nyamlen khé shing kyongwar shok
And skilfully sustain the practice of mind’s ultimate point.

tra rak tokpé walab rang sar shyi
With waves of coarse and subtle thought naturally calmed,
yomé sem kyi chuwo ngang gi né
And the river of mind unmoving, spontaneously stilled;
jing muk nyokpé drima dang dralwé
Uncontaminated by the taints of lethargy and dullness,
shyiné gyatso mi yo tenpar shok
May the ocean of śamatha remain steadfastly inert.

tarmé sem la yangyang tepé tsé
When looking repeatedly at unobservable mind,
tongmé dön ni jishyin lhak ger tong
The point of non-seeing is vividly seen, just as it is.
yin min dön la tetsom chöpa nyi
And indecision—is it? or is it not?—is cut right through.
trulmé rang ngo rang gi shepar shok
May I recognize my very own nature, without delusion.

yul la tepé yulmé sem su tong
Looking at objects, I see them as objectless mind;
sem la tepé semmé ngowö tong
Looking at mind, mind is absent, empty of essence;
nyi la tepé nyidzin rang sar drol
Looking at both, duality is liberated there and then—
ösal sem kyi neluk tokpar shok
May I realize mind’s true nature, which is clear light.

yi jé dralwa di ni chakgya ché
This absence of mental engagement is Mahāmudrā.
ta dang dralwa uma chenpo yin
The freedom from extremes is the great Middle Way.
di ni kündü dzogchen shyé kyangja
Since all is here included, it is also Great Perfection.
chik shé kün dön tokpé deng tob shok
May I acquire the confidence of knowing one and realizing all.

shyenpa mepé dechen gyünché mé
Great bliss without attachment continues uninterruptedly;
tsen dzin mepé ösal drib yokdral
Clear light without conceptual identification is unobscured;
lo lé depé mi tok lhün gyi drub
Non-conceptuality beyond the mind is spontaneously present—
tsolmé nyamnyong gyünché mepar shok
May effortless experience emerge in a never-ending flow.

zang shyen nyam kyi dzinpa rang sar drol
Attachment to positive experience is liberated of its own accord;
ngen tok trulpa rangshyin ying su dak
Negative thinking and delusion are purified within the natural expanse;
tamal shepa panglang dral tobmé
And ordinary awareness is neither shunned nor sought, neither lost nor gained—
trödral chönyi denpa tokpar shok
May I realize the truth of dharmatā that is beyond conceptual elaboration.

drowé rangshyin taktu sangye kyang
Although beings’ true nature has always been awakened,
ma tok wang gi tamé khorwar khyam
In their non-recognition, they wander in saṃsāra without end.
dukngal muta mepé semchen la
For these sentient beings whose misery knows no bounds,
zömé nyingjé gyü la kyewar shok
May I develop a compassion that is unbearably intense.

zömé nyingjé tsal yang magakpé
The strength of unbearable compassion is unrestricted,
tsé dü ngowo tong dön jenpar shar
And in this love, the reality of the empty essence laid bare.
zungjuk golsa dralwé lam chok di
May I constantly cultivate this supreme, unerring path of unity
dralmé nyintsen küntu gompar shok
And may I never be apart from it, by day or by night.

gom tob lé jung chen dang ngönshé dang
With sight and heightened perception born of meditation,
semchen min jé sangye shying rab jang
May I bring beings to maturity, fully purify buddha realms,
sangye chö nam drubpé mönlam dzok
And fulfil the aspirations to accomplish a buddha’s qualities—
dzok min jang sum tarchin sangye shok
Thus may I awaken, with perfecting, maturing and purifying all complete.

chok chü gyalwa sé ché tukjé dang
Through the compassion of the buddhas and their heirs in every direction,
namkar gewa jinyé yöpé tü
And the power of whatever wholesome virtue there might be,
detar dak dang semchen tamché kyi
May my own and all other beings’ purest aspirations
mönlam namdak jishyin drub gyur chik
Be fulfilled, exactly in accordance with our wishes.

This Aspiration of the Mahāmudrā of Definitive Meaning was composed by Lord Karmapa Rangjung
Dorje.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.